hello everyone
and welcome to today's project school
workshop on decentralized data
structures
where we will learn how this centralized
data structures
are applied on the ipfs network
uh it's it's my hope that by the end of
this event you learn the benefits of
hashing cryptographic hashing you learn
about content addressing
how much cultures work and how
diagonally centralized are
cyclic graphs power peer-to-peer
networks like ipfs
but before we get started uh just a few
points to note
that this event abides by the ipfs
africa community code of conduct
and we're keen on fostering an open and
welcoming environment for
our participants so we're glad to have
you all here
also if you have any questions during
the presentation please leave them in
the comments i'll get to them as we go
along
and perhaps you'll get an answer from
some of the other community members so
agenda for this evening
we'll be covering um a brief
introduction to produce school
a mission about produce school and a
brief introduction
of myself then we'll do we'll dive deep
into decentralized data structures
and how they're currently implemented on
web3 and how they're
how they are implemented on web 2 as
well
we will close this off for the q a
session and a virtual hangout
for anyone who might be interested in
that
so just a brief introduction about
myself i am sonia and i am a developer
i have worked on several decentralized
applications
including playmaker and i'm also a
conventional
technical writer my previous post can be
found
on my website at realtorlife.github.io
and i'm also root at drillshamelife on
all major platforms
that's github twitter or telegram if you
want maybe to have a look
at the rest of my previous work if you
just want to reach out to me
but if you prefer email as well you can
just email me
at real chain live portalmode.com
get in touch and let's create great
things
so what is produce school and what is
its mission
well produce school is a community
driven open source
project that is dedicated to making it
easy
for anyone to get started learning about
decentralized web technologies
for this chapter we're very keen on
providing developers with the
opportunities to learn
about different technologies like ipfs
ipld which is a interplanetary linked
data system
lib p2p and many more we do this
by championing the ability to easily
transfer value without
centralized institutions that currently
act as clearing agents
i will talk about this in depth
very shortly
so again what are these data structures
and
how does addressing on the web work
today and how do we think it's going to
work
in the future
well we're all probably familiar with
data structures and if you're a
developer you're probably already
thinking data structures already
data structures are a data structure is
a simple collection
of data values and the relationship
among them
this can be functions or operations that
are applied
in very in a very easy to access
or modify formats uh
i mean we use data structures in
different kinds of programs
and software's already so an example of
a data structure that we might be
familiar with
is one that collects um
is one where strings are assigned
properties
like a name of a person
or a username like in the example that
we have here
where this this structure collects
a person's name a person's username
on the platform github or twitter
this is just one of the common data
structures that we have out there
and they can come either in arrays
objects graphs and so many more
on web 2 on web 2 which is the current
web model these data structures are
accessed and shared through centralized
authorities
as you can see in the illustration here
the central server is where
all data structures are all data's
all complete network data and user
information is stored
and only when a request has been made to
central service through
an internet request through a get get
post request
is it then transmitted through the
interwebs and
sent to a user's
device the system has been the default
because
it's very easy to set up um it's very
easy
for its owners to delegate rules
or commands and because they sent and
because there's
a central control of the entire data
system
it's not only easy to maintain but
there's clear ways
of changing the systems structures or
processes that actually run
the entire system basically this
centralized server monitoring model
has worked for many for many companies
and it's been inbuilt in a lot of
software solutions on the web today
so then if
data requests can only be made to
central servers
how does the location or how
how is information addressed and how is
it located
on a centralized server well on the web
as it is today
service keeping lists or a directory of
data elements for example a path
or a file name for each data structure
and these primary addresses are what we
know today as
urls or uniform resource locators
because those service directories that
we use to locate
and retrieve data so information at any
given location
can usually be altered or completely
overwritten
without modification trackers on the
servers itself
say if a data request is initiated
then the data is retrieved from the
recorded
server location and the content headers
that are part of the return data tend to
indicate the location of the return
data as is in the illustration below
where example.com is the location for
the return database.png
now this kind of centralization of
data service has several
challenges attached to it because
although it has resulted in the creation
of
more web-based services and higher
adoption of the internet itself
some of its pitfalls can be very glaring
and very hard to ignore
for example vulnerabilities that are
created
in case of limitation to network
connectivity
right say if a server goes down
then all the services or all the
applications that rely on the central
servers
also tend to stop working um
there's also a second challenge of power
distribution
because of these high centralization
processes
then decision making tends to happen for
in a top-down hierarchical structure and
this can lead to dictatorship from
censorship
where owners of centralized servers then
act as gatekeepers
of the information on this particular
service
also a third a third challenge that a
lot of centralized
um service systems tend to face is
without fault or land setup or the use
of bucket service backup servers
then data losses can happen in case of
hardware
failures you're probably familiar with
as problems like this even at a very
micro level
for example losing your phone or losing
your laptop if you have any hardware
challenges and find that your access to
data that is stored on a central server
is
oftentimes lost forever
so then how do how how are some of these
problems
solved by the use of decentralized
data structures well one of the things
that tends to happen
on decentral undecentralized servers
is that
specialized data structures are created
which allow content to be verified and
linked together
this is because all of these databases
are shared across multiple servers
which form a grid of interconnected
nodes
as you can see in this illustration
uh devices and databases are connected
to to to the end user and
an interconnected grid of nodes
and what tends to happen is that large
data structures
on this decentralized systems are spread
across
network peers and interlinked in the
same way
any web page can link to a different
location
so what essentially powers the
centralized data structures
is the verified and linked data which
run across which can be accessed
directly
from network peers
so then how does addressing work on
a system of interconnected nodes well
this is where cryptographic hashing
comes in
and this is used as a new form of
linking content
called content addressing and on ipfs
on ipfs content addressing essentially
liberates us
from reliance on central authorities
because users
can retrieve data directly from other
peers
with the use of hashes that are
generated
every time an object has been added
to the network and hashing on ipfs
is where any data size
or type um
is returned as a string after
multiple calculations based on the
content of the data itself
basically hashes are
calculated from the content and the
resulting value
of a cryptographic hash calculation is
what we call
a hash it's a string that
you can think of as a unique name or a
fingerprint
for the data that has been added on the
ipfs network
as you can see in this illustration
below
buzz.png can be retrieved from the
address
qmw98 all the way through
because this is the cryptographic hash
that has been generated for the
imagebuster.png
after it was added on the ipfs network
so we'll talk more about cryptographic
hashing as we go along
but this is just an idea of how
this hashing that's done on the ipfast
network
contributes to decentralization of
data structures and how we can address
content and how we can retrieve content
on the iphone
network itself
so what's what then is peer-to-peer
networking
well using a combination of
cryptographic hashing
and content addressing you'll you will
unlock
what we now know as peer-to-peer
networking
which is the opposite of
location addressing where you urls
are used to indicate which authority we
should go to for data
and these authorities are often domains
and ultimately the contents of a file
on the centralized web have no direct
relationship with the location-based
address
on ipfs and other peer-to-peer networks
you'll find that since hashes
since we use hashes to request data on
the center on the decentralized web
we can think of it as a hash
we can think of a hash as
as a link and not just a name
now content addressing has multiple
implications
for example as long as a valid copy of a
file exists
then data on the ipfs network
is never lost another one of those
amazing implications of content
addressing
is it enables users to check the data's
fingerprint
or hash against the link providing
validation that
is not currently available on location
addressed links
now there's a lot of many different
kinds of protocols that are already
using
um these elements of cryptographic
hashing
to power their peer-to-peer networks uh
this
include git ethereum and bitcoin
for example so let's do a deep dive on
cryptographic hashing
and how cids or content identifiers are
generated and
used on the ipfast network
now when new information is for example
added
to the network the system generates and
records a content address which is
permanently linked
to the information itself
ipfess uses a combination of other
peer-to-peer technologies like
distributed hash tables
and bitsweb to determine the physical
location
of data and retrieve it so when a
request to retrieve
data from ipfs is made users must
provide the content identifier or the
cid
from which the system must must
determine
the physical location of the data and
retrieve it
and because cids are based on the
content itself
any change to a data element will
necessarily change
its content address in nearly all cases
editing store and in the and in nearly
all cases
um except where readable file systems
are involved
editing stored information is not
permitted
and this is pretty much what we call
immutability
now immutability is the foundation of
trust
on the ipfs network because
again because cryptographic hashing is
calculated from the content itself
if you wanted to retrieve for example
the content of a hash a you had to
provide
the hash itself to the network which
will then
look for the hash which matches what you
have provided and retrieve the
information
at the end of that address if you for
example provide a hash
but find that the original content has
been modified
then you will fail to meet the trust
calculation and you will not get
the content at the end of the house you
have provided
so then how do content identifiers
actually
work how are they generated whether what
are the different kinds of formats that
they take on i prefers network
well first of the first thing that
we have to touch on
is the fact that content addressing can
be used on
all different types of files and data
from json objects to publish papers to
different kinds of videos
and for cryptographic hashing itself to
work we need to know what data format
we're working with
and then only then can we find the
appropriate encoding
and decoding tool to use so the first
step to creating a cid for example
is to transform what the network tends
to do
is to transform the input data using
a cryptographic hash that matches its
it's
its size to affect output size
and this is pretty much what we call
hashing
so other other other other formats that
are considered when
a content identifier is being generated
by the network
is the multi-codex the hashing algorithm
the hashing length and the hash value of
the content identifier itself
which is created out of the content
itself so these are just the components
that form that form the content
identifier the cid
so the multi-codec for example is a
prefix which
indicates the encoding that was used to
integrate the data
so if you are inputting a json object
versus if you are inputting
a video format then the multi codecs for
each
will be different based on the content
itself
if you are the cryptographic hash that
is used to
to run the hashing function
for every object that is added on the
network
the default algorithm used in ipfs to
generate
cids is the shire256
but cids uh they they differ
based on the cryptographic hash that is
used
to integrate the underlying content
itself so there's
several other types of um algorithms
that are used
but charity 56 is the default
so the actual length of a cryptographic
hash itself
and this can often be described as the
default length which tends to be 256
based on the default
hashing algorithm but this can vary
based on the content itself
as well and then the last component of
a quantum identifier is the hash value
itself
that is the result of the hashing
process
so what are the implications of cids or
content identifiers well cads
allow the network to build data
structures that link to other data
structures
in completely different formats and
throughout the network
we use these hashes to distribute
and link data and on ipfs
these data structures of these
structures of linkedin
are called mobile trees and in some
extent
and to some extent director doesn't
click crafts
but we will get to that right after this
so what are my goal trees and dags
yeah what morgan trees
and how they work well first when an
object is added to ipfs
it is chunked up into small parts
so this can be parts of 206 kilobytes
each
and each part is hashed and a cd is
created for each chunk
of which these chunks are combined into
a hierarchical data structure for which
a single base
cid is computed and this way
you'll end up with a series of objects
that
are linked via their
cids this is how
it works this is how it looks when it is
implemented
in this graph for example node e
contains
references to node f and node g
because and what this what this means
for this markov tree
is
is that the hash of node e is unique to
a node
that is containing the addresses of node
f
and node g uh this is
likely because node f and or g
contain parts of an object that has been
linked
to node e and node e
contains parts of an object that has
been linked
to node c and node b now imagine if we
run it
and run directory e through a hashing
algorithm
which contains subdirectories f and g
well the content derived hash we get
back from include references
to those two directories and that's how
it applies
all the way down from root to node g
so root here or which is the final
base of the tree that is built up at the
end of the hashing process
is unique to a tree that contains every
node
all the way down so this these data
structures are built backwards
from the leaf nodes all the way up to
the root node
and this also builds into the tag
structure
and dags is just
a fancy way of saying directional cyclic
graph which is
which is a way of describing a very
specific type of merkle
or a hash tree where different branches
in a tree can point to
other branches in the tree in a single
forward direction as is shown in this
illustration
so this collection of linked data is
very tamper-proof
because all the content is hash verified
and since we're using the contents of
the object we
we don't have a lot of duplication in
fact
this solves the problem of deduplication
very well
and objects that hold the same
content they're considered equal
and they share the same hash value and
are only start
once on the fps network so we've covered
a lot
so far and i'll just check to see if we
have any questions
but if you also um
if you have any questions i think uh now
is it
is a great time to maybe leave them in
the comment section and i'll try to get
to them
but one of the things that we can say
this centralized data structures are
actually
solving is they prevent
the creation of a single point of
failure
which hackers or malicious attackers can
continue to compromise um a network
uh what this does is that it provides a
lot of network redundant
redundancy because this makes
decentralized networks
more resilient in the case
in in the event that if individual
servers
go down then you have several other
peers that can
function as per caps or backup servers
at any given time uh this also
feeds into the flexibility of the
network itself because it's more
redundant
then a network is able to
add or remove nodes at greater
efficiency
and this improves network security
itself because if a node
or appear on the decentralized network
is compromised
or damaged then a lot of this
is limited to the affected nodes and it
doesn't
spread to the entire um
network itself of course are a lot of
very many more um
advantages of these kinds of data
structures
but what we've seen so far is the
adoption
of decentralized data structures in
the creation of new web3 technologies
the internet as as it started off it
started off as a decentralized
network working as peer-to-peer based
as a peer-to-peer based system but
after coming off of
the dot-com bubble of 1999 it pretty
much
morphed into a read-only static network
or web 2 which we know today
as a read write and interactive form of
the internet
but with the increase in adoption of
trusting and verifiable system based off
of
decentralized data structures and
blockchain technology
we're seeing an increase in solutions
that are
being built in this ecosystem and ipfs
is just one of them and there's still
very many more opportunities to build
very many more um amazing solutions
because as you can see the ipfs
ecosystem
is is huge and it's um
it's growing every day these are just
some
of the products and solutions that are
being built on ipfs
for ibfs utilizing all the different
components of decentralized data
structures so all of this i built off of
the principles of cryptographic hashing
built off of
all different kinds of
algorithms built off of
different kinds of data structures like
comoco trees
or different kinds of dives so
you can always look up any of this see
how they work see how they
uh contribute to ipfs see if there's a
great place for you to get started say
for example
if you are interested in building um
solutions that store and distribute
packages of containers
this is a great opportunity for using
decentralized systems
uh if you are interested in building
smart contracts or large data solutions
or if you're interested in storing and
distributing front-end
apps and user data um there's a lot of
opportunities to getting started
with technology getting started with
ipfs
and we would love to see you joining the
community
uh we have a lot of through me other
resources that
can enable you to learn more about the
systems
for example you can look up some of
these
topics like um understanding how ipfs
deals with files
or understanding the life cycle of data
on the distributed way of the
on the decentralized web um we also have
other produce school resources like the
anatomy of
of a cid sorry with that or
understanding how peer-to-peer data
links
actually work with content addressing
we also have upcoming events you can
join us
for the ipfs um community meetup
harare or just the main ipfs community
meetup
that can be that will be announced any
day soon
i will also be running several events um
building some distributed applications
with blue php
or the reimagining the storage landscape
was found
with filecoin this will all be
interactive learning sessions and would
love for you to be
there as well
again uh you can follow produce school
at purdue school
i product school to get started with
any of the other interactive tutorials
that have been designed
and available for you to get started
with
uh alternatively if you have any
question that we may not
get to today then you can reach out to
other community members
at discuss.ifas.io
uh the fpfest github community repos has
a lot of
resources for you to connect with and
maybe get started with ipfs itself and
of course on twitter you can follow
protoschool for the protocol labs
the ipfs spot or i profess africa
to pretty much stay
on board with everything that we
announced anything that may be coming up
um and links to other resources to
getting started
so this is the end of the presentation
now i will start taking
questions um maybe questions
in in the chat